---
layout: post
title:  "Promise"
date:   2016-03-07
categories: concurrency
---

The promise is the last synchronization mechanism. We already wrote about the
others, namely [`{%raw%}std::async{%endraw%}`](/blog/2016/02/futures.html),
[`{%raw%}std::packaged_task{%endraw%}`](/blog/2016/02/packaged-task.html) and
[`{%raw%}std::condition_variable{%endraw%}`](/blog/2016/01/condition-variable.html).


Similar as with other synchronization techniques, the promise is associated
with a `{%raw%}std::future{%endraw%}`. `{%raw%}std::async{%endraw%}` and
`{%raw%}std::packaged_task{%endraw%}` set a value to the future by returning from a
callable object. But the promise can explicitly set the value to the future. Let's explain how this works. 

Promise
-------

We would like to set a value, of the type `{%raw%}int{%endraw%}`, to the
future. 

### *Creation* ###

First, the default constructor of the `{%raw%}std::promise{%endraw%}` creates a promise.

{% highlight c++ %}
std::promise<int> promise;
{% endhighlight %}

The promise has a template parameter `{%raw%}int{%endraw%}`, because we would
like to set a value of the type `{%raw%}int{%endraw%}` to the future. 

### *The future* ###

The `{%raw%}.get_future(){%endraw%}` member function of the
`{%raw%}std::promise{%endraw%}` creates a future.

{% highlight c++ %}
std::future<int> future = promise.get_future();
{% endhighlight %}

The template parameter of the future is the same as the template parameter of
the promise.

### *Setting the value* ###

The `{%raw%}.set_value(...){%endraw%}` member function of the
`{%raw%}std::promise{%endraw%}` sets the value to the future.

{% highlight c++ %}
promise.set_value(42);
{% endhighlight %}

We already know how to obtain the value from the future:

{% highlight c++ %}
int answer = future.get();
{% endhighlight %}

In our example, the `{%raw%}answer{%endraw%}` is `{%raw%}42{%endraw%}`, because
the promise sets the value `{%raw%}42{%endraw%}` to the future.

### *Typical usage* ###

The typical usage of the promise is:

* creating a promise,

* retrieving the future from the promise,

* passing the promise to some other thread,

* setting a value to the future via the promise,

* obtaining the value from the future.


Temperature tomorrow re-revisited
---------------------------------

We will use the following, already well known, story: 

A couple, wife and husband, are going on a picnic tomorrow. The wife would like
to know what will be the temperature of the weather. Therefore, she asks her
husband to look it up.

We modeled this story with the
[`{%raw%}std::async{%endraw%}`](/blog/2016/02/futures.html) and the
[`{%raw%}std::packaged_task{%endraw%}`](/blog/2016/02/packaged-task.html). But
in this example, we will use the `{%raw%}std::promise{%endraw%}` for the
synchronization.

{% highlight c++ %}
#include <iostream>
#include <string>
#include <chrono>

#include <thread>
#include <future>
#include <utility>


void make_break(int millisec)
{
    std::this_thread::sleep_for(std::chrono::milliseconds(millisec));
}
{% endhighlight %}

The beginning is the same as in previous examples: the include statements and
`{%raw%}make_break{%endraw%}` function. 

{% highlight c++ %}
void temperature(std::promise<int> answer)
{
    std::cout << "Husband: Hm, is the weather "
              << "forecast in the newspaper?\n" 
              << "         Eh, we don't "
              << "have a newspaper at home..." << std::endl;
    
    make_break(2);
    
    std::cout << "Husband: I will look it up on the internet!" << std::endl;
    
    make_break(2);
    
    std::cout << "Husband: Here it is, "
              << "it says tomorrow will be 40." << std::endl;
    
    answer.set_value(40);
}
{% endhighlight %}

The argument of the `{%raw%}temperature(...){%endraw%}` is the
`{%raw%}std::promise<int>{%endraw%}`. At the end, the function sets the value to
the associated future via `{%raw%}.set_value(...){%endraw%}` member function of
the promise.

{% highlight c++ %}
int main()
{
    std::cout << "Wife:    Tomorrow, we are going on a picnic.\n" 
              << "         What will be the weather...\n" 
              << "         \"What will be the "
              << "temperature tomorrow?\"" << std::endl;
    
    std::promise<int> promise;
    std::future<int> answer = promise.get_future();
    std::thread thread(temperature, std::move(promise));
    thread.detach();
    
    make_break(2);
    
    std::cout << "Wife:    I should pack for tomorrow." << std::endl;
    
    make_break(2);

    std::cout << "Wife:    Hopefully my husband can figure out the weather soon."
              << std::endl;
    
    int temp = answer.get();

    std::cout << "Wife:    Finally, tomorrow will be " << temp << "... Em...\n"
              << "         \"In which units is the answer?\"" 
              << std::endl;

    return 0;
}
{% endhighlight %}

The main function creates a promise and retrieves the future from the
promise. Then, we pass the promise to the `{%raw%}temperature(...){%endraw%}`
function which is executed in another thread. The
`{%raw%}std::promise{%endraw%}` is not copyable, therefore
`{%raw%}std::move{%endraw%}` moves it to the function.

At the end, the `{%raw%}.get(){%endraw%}` member function of the future
retrieves the value.

The entire source code is available
[here](https://github.com/jakaspeh/concurrency/blob/master/promise.cpp). The
output of the program is:

{% highlight bash %}
$ ./promise
Wife:    Tomorrow, we are going on a picnic.
         What will be the weather...
         "What will be the temperature tomorrow?"
Husband: Hm, is the weather forecast in the newspaper?
         Eh, we don't have a newspaper at home...
Wife:    I should pack for tomorrow.
Husband: I will look it up on the internet!
Wife:    Hopefully my husband can figure out the weather soon.
Husband: Here it is, it says tomorrow will be 40.
Wife:    Finally, tomorrow will be 40... Em...
         "In which units is the answer?"
{% endhighlight %}

This is the third solution of this problem. First one used
`{%raw%}std::async{%endraw%}` and second one used
`{%raw%}std::packaged_task{%endraw%}`. Now, we can compare the solutions between
each other and see the semantic differences between them. 

Summary
-------

The `{%raw%}std::promise{%endraw%}` can directly set a value to the associated
`{%raw%}std::future{%endraw%}` with `{%raw%}.set_value(){%endraw%}` member
function.

In this article, we learned how to use the `{%raw%}std::promise{%endraw%}`. 

Links:

* [Source code](https://github.com/jakaspeh/concurrency/blob/master/promise.cpp)
* [std::promise](http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/thread/promise/promise)
* [Stackoverflow: std::promise vs. the other mechanisms](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/14283703/when-is-it-a-good-idea-to-use-stdpromise-over-the-other-stdthread-mechanisms)
* [Packaged task](/blog/2016/02/packaged-task.html)
* [Futures](/blog/2016/02/futures.html)